hey everybody this episode is brought to
you by our very own relationship theory
subscribe to relationship theory at
youtube.com
forward slash relationship theory or
click the link at the top of the episode
description
and i will see you there along with my
lovely wife
[Music]
everybody welcome to another episode of
conversations with tom i am here with
the absolute
legend richard dawkins and we are going
to be talking about his latest book
outgrowing god and hopefully a whole
bunch of other things you've written
such a library of seminal works that
revolve around rationality the pursuit
of truth
secularism as a power for good
and wanted to dive into
something that i'm particularly obsessed
with which what
is the the advantage of truth why do you
think it's so
important for people to start there from
an evolutionary point of view i think
the truth
probably helped you to survive i mean
you
need a realistic assessment of where the
lions are where the waterhole is all
that kind of thing in
our ancestral past today i think it's
perhaps even more important where we're
actually assailed by uh political
leaders who are
who believe in alternative truth where
um
they actually want to distort truth for
their own purposes so i think the truth
is the biggest weapon
against demagogues and demagogues are
one one of the things we have to deal
with
today so in a world where truth is
routinely distorted
where you get social media rabbit holes
where people can create
that sort of echo chamber around
themselves how
do people because i don't know that
everybody ends up there on purpose to be
quite frankly
to be quite frank so how do you
recommend people
um approach thought or thinking or
to make sure that they are on a path of
rationality
i fear we all to some extent are
susceptible to the echo chamber effect
and it's a thing we need to fight
against and i try to fight against it
um well believe in evidence
i believe in in rationality
the organization that i'm a part of
which is the center for inquiry
which has merged with my own foundation
the richard dawkins foundation
is all about rationality all about
skepticism all about
testing propositions for their truth and
so we have
uh for example a lawsuit at the moment
against homeopathy
which not only doesn't work but cannot
work define homeopathy okay
this is the the pseudomedical belief
goes back quite a long way
that the way you treat a disease is by
or a problem is by giving a very very
small dose
of of whatever the offending thing is
and by very very small dose i mean very
very very small
i mean they dilute and dilute and dilute
and dilute and dilute
so much so that i think james randy once
calculated that the
oh they think that the more you dilute
it the more effective it becomes
which is crazy obviously um and he
calculated that
uh for the most effective according to
them homeopathic
remedies you would need uh a volume of
water the size of the solar system
the single molecule of the active
ingredient in it
and so that's homeopathy and what our
lawsuit is about is not to prevent
people
selling it but to prevent people putting
it on the same
shelf as proper
tested medicines so you're looking for a
remedy for a cough or a cold or
or whatever it is and you look along the
shelf
and you see homeopathic remedies sitting
right next door to
proper remedies and that's what we're
fighting against they must have a
separate shelf
called homeopathy and preferably also
called by the way this doesn't work
what is it about because i find there's
a certain type of person that's really
drawn
to that what is it about um
human evolution that's led us to have
what all i will lovingly term the woowoo
gene where there's just some people that
really respond to a more mystical answer
versus
doesn't that i i mean one of the things
that's a bit depressing is that when
people give up religion
they sometimes switch to woo-woo as you
as you say
it's as though they somehow can't quite
divorce themselves
from from nonsense i mean what we want
to do is to switch from all kinds of
supernatural nonsense
to rationality evidence-based thinking
critical thinking
is is the notion of a god neuron real
like is
is there a region of the brain that when
faced with the supernatural makes it
creates a neurochemical state where you
feel that profound sense of on
connection that people are chasing
i would hesitate to say a neuron i mean
i think that
that human brains are susceptible in
that kind of way
and i think it's one of the things one
of the weaknesses of the human brain
um understandable perhaps and but i i
wouldn't call it
i wouldn't call it a single neuron no so
and i i definitely say that more is just
like uh
when i step back and i look at this and
i think okay there
as somebody who won full disclosure i
believe that
a level of self-delusion is tied to
happiness so there is like i'll often
tell people
when i'm thinking about myself i care
necessarily less about what is true
because i'm probably more likely to
believe something negative
but because i want to succeed at a
certain level i'm
obsessed with accurately identifying the
world the way that it is and not the way
that i wish it were be
so homeopathy is a great place to start
because you're looking for a
health-based outcome
and ultimately health-based outcomes
come down to you're either alive or
you're dead these are pretty like
binary things they're very serious
consequences
so that to me is a really interesting
place to start so if you have somebody
who
is they have a neurological state that
they are chasing
that i will in in a generous framing
i'll call ah
and i will say that ah is arguably one
of the most profound and enjoyable
states so if when i'm presented with
this notion of
hey there's this magical way to take
this compound dilute it
and it it becomes almost like a divine
moment some
magical mystical thing that i can't
explain happens and that speaks to that
sense of like
connection and wonder that i have which
it doesn't with me but i'm just saying
like if i were to
guess at what makes people go for that
instead of tylenol or
you know something that we know and can
test and measure actually has an impact
is the hope by shining a light on that
if it really is a
real neurological phenomenon is the hope
that by shining a light on that people
can sort of talk themselves through it
yes i think i'll make it
a contrast between say astrology and
astronomy
where both of them tap into that feeling
of
all that you describe and when peop
people talk about um
jupiter moving into the second house of
aquarius or whatever it is
that has the same kind of free song that
you can get
from talking about galaxies uh and
and um galaxies rotating and and
we moving around the galaxy it's the
same kind of free song
of awe that we get but one of them is
nonsense
and the other one is true and beautiful
and beautiful because it's true
and so um i
we we want to promote the astronomy and
everything like that like
like um evolutionary biology like
geology
like physics these are all wonderful
because they're true
but they are wonderful and the thought
that you can actually
understand the universe in which we
are and why life arose where it did
and why it developed in the way it did
that is absolutely wonderful
and to deprive children
of that wonder is an act of
wanton vandalism cruelty
that is uh that is something i i will
very much agree with like when you
stand on the i don't know even just
stand somewhere where there's no light
pollution and look up at the sky and
that sense of like
seeing the sky for the first time and
and being so
ridiculously small was that to create
that sense of wonder in the face of
of the real natural world was that the
goal with something like outgrowing god
which i know you aimed at a younger
audience very much so um the first half
of outgrowing god
is about sort of debunking god in
various ways
um beginning with there are so many
different gods that people believed in
and moving through
the bible and how unreliable it is and
then to
morality and how we don't need god for
morality and so on
then the second half of the book is
about science uh
mostly evolution because that's my
subject and also that's because
because that's probably the main reason
why from a scientific point of view
people do believe in god they
they look at living things they look at
the complexity of living things they
think
well that has to be designed by some
master engineer as a master designer
so the second half of the book is
largely devoted to dispelling
that illusion and then the final chapter
is about the more wondrous deep
questions of cosmology
the origin of physics the origin of the
laws of physics what happened before the
big bang things like that
and the idea is taking courage from
darwin
darwin solved the big problem
in that field which was explaining life
because life really is
until you understand darwinism life is
deeply mysterious
darwin solved that and that should give
us the courage to realize that one day
we will solve
the other problems like the origin of
the laws of physics why is there
something rather than nothing
yeah that that to me the question and i
i've heard you talk very eloquently
about
um einstein may have done a bit of a
disservice by always using god language
but his notion of you know i want to
know
god's thoughts and everything else is
just details um
that's always wrong with such a
beautiful mystery to me
um i love that quote um and one of my
employees here has a degree in
neuroscience and she was just
absolutely transformed you you have
shaped her view of religion as an adult
and when she was telling me the story
she was saying there was such a smile on
her face as if you had
opened that door of wonder for her there
was there was no sense that you had
diminished something
um it felt like she had traded one thing
in maybe that had served her very well
when she was younger whatever but after
encountering the ideas of
that sort of pursuit of truth and and
opening yourself to the beauty of what
is real
it was very obviously impactful for her
is there something
that you think particularly in this book
or in any of your other books like
if you had one thing to tell somebody
and you wanted to open that door of
wonderment to um the the real world the
natural world however you want to define
it what's that
what you say about her of course is
music to my ears that's wonderful here
um i wouldn't think on one thing i mean
the whole
shebang the whole the whole of life
everything about him and
i in in this book outgrowing god i pick
on one or two things like the
chameleon's tongue
um octopus skin i mean these are just
two out of millions of possible examples
you could choose everything about is
wonderful about life is wonderful
and in my other books like the blind
watchmaker i picked on
bat echo ranging for example
um in climbing mountain bravo i picked
on vision and i picked on spider webs
in this outgrowing god i picked on the
chameleon's tongue
and and um the octopus skin
the octopus skin you know changing color
from second to second not like a
chameleon which changes color
from minute to minute um octopus and
squids and kefla
and kettlepods generally cuttlefish
change color from second to second and
they can actually
kind of play movies over their skin
almost literally play movies over their
skin
um at sort of real speed
have you seen there was a recent video
that i saw that was
um it admittedly they don't know what it
was doing but it looks
exactly like the octopus is dreaming
and it's rapid eye movement and its skin
is like changing color
so fast it was crazy i think they think
with their skin
and i've got on record of saying that
whoa and dream with their skin is a
lovely thought too
that's really interesting um when was
the first time
that you saw something so profound or
read something so profound whatever that
moment was that made you go i'm going to
be an evolutionary biologist what was
that thing that just slapped you upside
the head i don't think that happened to
me i think i
i had the other way around i kind of got
to oxford and
and um my second year there started
getting interested in the sort of
philosophical questions
i don't think i ever had a kind of
natural history i do plenty now
but there wasn't one that hit me over
the head when i was young and
put me into that what are some of those
things now
oh gosh well i just mentioned some of
them i mean just
things i put into my and is what is it
about that so i will say when i saw the
octopus the thing that freaked me out
and i'm
i would guess maybe this isn't what you
were uh drawn to but when i saw what
looked like an octopus dreaming i
thought oh my god
they're more human than we think they're
basically the aliens we've been waiting
for
like all the wonder like if if an
octopus came from outer space
we would freak out yes but the fact that
it's in our oceans we're like oh well
it's always been here
so the the the way that it made me feel
this like oh my god it's us even now
just telling you that i'm getting the
chills
is it is it the nature of evolution that
when you see how complex it becomes that
that gives
you an intellectual point of view yes
but uh i mean you're right about aliens
when i once went to a lecture by a man
who was
doing research on octopuses and he said
began his election by saying the thing
is
these are the martians and that's that's
right i mean
they are very very alien and um
they seem to be very intelligent uh i
think we should give them the benefit of
the doubt and assume that they probably
do have
feelings i don't know if this is
actually true but i heard one time that
it is illegal where i don't know but
illegal to operate on an octopus without
anesthetic because the assumption is
that they're
so highly developed i would hope so i
mean i would i would like to think
that's true
that that's true in certainly in britain
i think in america of
vertebrates and i think octopuses
keflapods generally
have been admitted to that charm circle
uh whereas arthropods haven't i think
yeah that that to me is uh is deeply
fascinating so
what do you say when the the blind
watchmaker i think makes a really
amazing um it gives an amazing example
of how you get something so complicated
but yet leaves these telltale signs of
things that are
so obviously nonsensical if you were
thinking of of intelligent design
walk people through that aren't familiar
with the the
um the nerve that runs through the
giraffes
uh the laryngeal nerve which um all
vertebrates have in one form or another
um in our fish ancestors uh
the equivalent nerve went to one of the
gills
uh and um it it passes um
posteriorly to to um a major
uh blood vessel in the in the
um chest of whatever you call it
of a fish when the fish started to
evolve
and and develop a neck and became
eventually
mammals um the nerve
started to get stretched in a detour
because it no no once there were there
was a neck when i start again
it starts in the in the brain and in
mammals it innervates the larynx
the voice box and it um
doesn't go directly to the larynx it
goes straight past the larynx down into
the chest
loops around one of the main blood
vessels in the chest and then goes back
up to the larynx which is a detour
in a giraffe it's a very very big detour
indeed
and the reason for it is history as i
was started to say in our fish ancestors
that same nerve passed south of that
equivalent blood vessel and so it wasn't
any detail it was it was at the direct
route
but when the neck started to grow longer
um it became a detour
and it wasn't a very big detail to begin
with it was just just a slight detour
and as it got longer in evolution
the marginal cost of each successive
increment in the detour was slight
so it wasn't worth it to
radically change the embryological
process and jump
the nerve over the blood vessel that
would have required a major
rethink so to speak of the embryology so
it just got longer and longer and longer
and longer
and in the giraffe as i said it's it's
absurdly long
so it's a wonderful example of how
history
explains what is obviously bad design
yeah that's it what i love about that is
when you think about
how complex we are the the real
temptation is to jump
to um well obviously there's there's
thought behind this this is so
calculated but when you start to
see example after example like that it
really gets pretty fascinating you don't
really need that i mean it's it's a it's
a silly inference actually to say that
it must have had a designer because i
think as you said earlier
um you've still got to explain where the
design came from and so and so you
haven't actually
got done anything when you said that
there's a designer it's a
non-explanation
what darwin provided was a real
explanation
which goes back to primeval ultimate
simplicity
and then gradually increases the
complexity over time
that's what you want and that's what
we've got do you have a
a mechanism uh metaphor that you use to
really imagine time i've heard you say
and i think this is so right
people just cannot conceive of how long
a million
there are many i mean and they're all
equally good really
the one about making a clock be the
whole of
of geological time and um
humanity came on the scene five seconds
before midnight that kind of thing
another one i like is you stretch your
arm out and you say
the middle of my neck my tie is is the
origin of life
and then my fingertip there is the
present
and the dinosaurs don't come in until
about
my wrist there maybe the middle of my
palm
the dinosaurs are very recent compared
to the time that it's been available
and um humanity comes in at about
near the end of my fingernail and the
whole of
recorded history the ancient egyptians
the babylonians the hebrews the greeks
the romans
all of all of recorded written history
is the dust in one stroke of the nail
fire
yeah that is um that i think has that
same sort of pale blue dot effect for me
where it's like man it's the
unimaginably
long amount of time that it's taken us
to get here is is so
massive and ultimately everything we
think of as important
important and world shaking and defining
everything that we know
is this just infinitesimally small dot
floating through space
um that is uh yeah that to me is
is really really interesting now when
you begin to
tease out sort of okay we have selfish
genes which want to make sure that they
replicate and so they're going to do
things that maximize that behavior
whether for the person or for
the the lineage so that you know a
mother would sacrifice for her kids that
makes sense especially if she's past her
age of reproduction the kids are
reproductively viable she is not and so
you would expect some sort of mechanism
to arrive on the scene for that
my real obsession is more along the
lines of epigenetic changes and how much
malleability
we really have so if you had asked me
five years ago i would have without
intending it but i would have said
something that sounded a lot like being
a blank slate the more i research
especially stephen pinker and you get
into reading the actual blank slate and
realizing just how much we come
pre-programmed with
it gets very interesting but i am still
particularly fascinated by the amount
that we can change do you think at all
about
um adaptation as a even if it's just
cultural like adaptation within within a
single lifetime or does that feel like
just the absolute wrong word
well i wouldn't use the same word i
think i think
it's very important obviously cultural
adaptation is very important
but it comes about through such a
different mechanism
than um darwinian adaptation that
it's important not to not to confuse
them
like you i greatly admire steve pinker's
blank slate
um and matt ridley has written a similar
book which i
recommend to you um nature via nurture
it's called um
so i think that um for partly political
reasons
um nature is underestimated
and i think there's a kind of political
pressure how so well
um it's becoming unfashionable to to
suggest for one single moment that there
might be
genetic differences between male and
female for for example
i mean you get you get tired and
feathered if you say that yeah um
and um obviously um cultural influences
are
immensely important but so are hormonal
influences and
and uh you can't really deny that and
there is a kind of tendency for
political reasons to attempt to downplay
the importance of biological have you by
any chance this is an
outside shot this is not strike me as
your kind of book but have you read the
book a billion wicked thoughts
no is that again a billion wicked
thoughts
richard dawkins you must read this book
it is it is salacious to say the least
yes
but it was basically these um google
engineers who said every time you try to
study sex
you you can't get real results because
people are gonna lie they're
uncomfortable about it so even if you
say this is all anonymous don't worry
you know that people are gonna be
they're gonna hedge their bets and then
these two engineers thought wait a
second there's actually been the largest
experiment on human sexuality ever done
already and it's called the internet
and anonymous searching but you can
actually tie it back to certain
amounts of data so they went through i
don't know how many
millions of searches and they began to
just group things
this had a profound impact on me so i
know you don't know a lot about what we
do at impact theory but we're a media
company so
ultimately our goal is to make film and
tv but i want to make film and tv that
help
shape culture so that people begin to
think in a certain way that will empower
them and make their lives more
fulfilling
long story so i when i'm reading this
book and i'm seeing the profound
difference
between what men search for as far as
porn goes and what women search for
it is crazy and he took the they took i
should say
passages of males describing sex
in like basically smut books and then
women describing sex and their version
of erotic novels it is the the exact
same act
it is hysterical the difference and it
was one of those where i was like
the the differences aren't slight they
are
massive and so that was one where i was
just like as as a person who makes film
and tv you must know your demographic
because the the way the brain responds
to stimulus is so
different from men to women and people
can tar and feather me all they want
it's just like that's just naked in the
data yeah so i'm not saying one is
better than the other i'm just saying
they are very different
it wasn't it google where somebody was
sacked for
james damore yeah yeah yeah that whole
thing look i think ultimately this all
flips and so here's the good news
the position that um myself and my wife
and co-founder and it's like
we want to help and we want to impact
people but we're not beholden to anybody
we're self-funded blah blah so
um for us our thinking is the only way
forward
is the one that is real and whatever
real is then we need to get to real now
i
personally think that the only thing
that's really interesting is
the when you get into differences it's
going to be at the tails right if you're
thinking of a bell curve so sure at the
tails there's a lot of
difference it's a lot of fun for the
most part people that take up the bulk
of the curve you're all going to be able
to do whatever
you want yeah it's like the bell curves
yes so whatever you want to do you're
going to be able to do
it's not like anyone race sex ethnic
anything is going to outperform the
other
yeah the vast majority of all the bell
curves overlap so i don't give a [__]
about that but
what i find utterly fascinating is is
the sort of revelatory nature of what
happens at the tails to hint at
sort of where we've been pushed
evolutionarily
um to go so anyway i check out that book
it's it's i think
very very i will and i applaud what
you're saying about what matters is the
real
this of course is the mission of the
center for inquiry and the richard
dawkins foundation that we are
out there to try to promote the real and
truth
uh and skeptical examination
of evidence-based reality and it's a
very very important mission because as i
said earlier we are living in a time
where
um where reality is being actively
distorted
and it's very important to counteract
that so what's interesting to me is
i think some of that distortion falls in
line with what you call
conjurers what i'll call magicians or
mentalists
um darren brown impacted me so
dramatically and for a uk audience they
will know instantly who that is for an
american audience
he's sort of uh there isn't really an
exact correlate because he's a mentalist
so he's not doing card tricks but he's
using similar things
but i was watching a video on a flight
of all places
and it impacted me so profoundly i
thought about quitting my job moving to
the uk to study with him
because what he's able to get you to
think you're seeing
is so incredible do you think there's
overlap between
a magician stroke conjurer and some of
the stuff that we see happening
in uh the realm of politics and by that
i mean specifically that they are aware
of the psychological um sort of
illusions
and they exploit them well darren brown
called himself a mentalist
and um he gives i mean his his
his act is to pretend to read people's
thoughts and to influence people's
thoughts
um he's just a conjuring he's just doing
tricks like anybody else
um and um he even
pretends to be using techniques he
clearly isn't using
i mean for example he will suggest that
when he appears to telepathically
read somebody's thoughts he will he will
say okay i'll explain how i do it did
you notice in my pattern before we
started
that i kept on mentioning the sea and
sailing
and ships and
giving you the impression that he was
suggesting to the
victim something to do with the sea
if that role he was doing then he would
be right statistically
maybe a majority of the time but he
wouldn't be right all the time
he's right all the time so he's doing
tricks like any other magician
so i mean i wouldn't be too bespoked by
him if i were you
no no not definitely not spooked but um
the
admittedly some of what i think he is
pulling off
may be entirely true sort of sleight of
hand whether it's you know somebody in
his ear or whatever saying
something that they picked up from the
audience um and that would be
less intriguing yes but certainly his
ability to enrapture a crowd to get
everybody focused in one place
to make the performance seamless
i don't think i've ever seen it done
better like he definitely
creates this sort of incredible
environment
and to create that environment i think
you even though
when he is saying i'm using this
psychological technique or that
psychological technique that might be a
bbs i think he really does understand
psychology well enough to control a
crowd
and that's where i think he gets really
really interesting but i mean
what i think about all i mean he's a
great great counselor but then so is
jamie ian swiss so it says the amazing
randy
so a pen and teller there there are
several of them um
and what they make when the message i
get from that is that
what looks like a miracle isn't and
um my emotions screams at me this is a
miracle it's got to be a miracle
um and but it but it's not and the same
thing i've
i i generalized that to them the big
problems like
how he really asked me to believe that
the universe started as a random
quantum fluctuation and then grew up
through inflation and
things uh that seems i can't believe
that that's incredible
you can't i cannot be serious no that's
exactly my reaction to a great conjurer
and that's only a trick well in the same
way
the universe starting from a random
quantum fluctuation and
nothing annihilating itself from
becoming something whatever it is
that's equally hard to believe and the
fact that
conjurers can fool you give me the
confidence to say
because that's a trick and there really
is a scientific explanation for that we
should not
lose confidence in the ability to
explain
the origin of the universe by science
i'm not saying that's a trick of course
i'm not it's another matter entirely
but our instinctive incredulity
is something we should strive and
struggle to overcome
your laundry list of extraordinary books
pointed a life mission that you then
echo precisely on your website you just
come out and flat say like i'm trying
to bring the world to rationality and a
more
secular understanding so that we can
move forward in a way that's productive
um is there and so
your life mission that becomes very
understandable is there a way
that you think the specific things that
you touch on from an evolutionary
biological perspective become usable in
somebody's day-to-day life so take me
i'm not an evolutionary biologist
but i use these things tremendously like
when i think about
demographics and i think about telling a
story i need to understand
the differences in my audience where
somebody is developmentally when they're
a child where they are as an adult where
they are as a male as a female
to understand that and i have found that
putting that in an evolutionary context
has been tremendously helpful
and even just understanding my own
emotions where they come from why i
should or shouldn't listen to them
do you what are things that you want
people to take away in their daily life
i don't use my science very much in that
way to
try to um get where my audience is
coming from
i i don't um
i don't think i quite do what i mean i
understand what you're doing and i
respect that but i don't think i i
really do that
do you think so more than i'm asking if
you do it because i your mission is very
clear
you're i'll say operating at a societal
level
and now i'm asking at a personal level
so if somebody reads your books
let's say they read all of them do you
think that there's an amalgamation of
of information there that allows them to
steer their own life
instead of just trying to steer society
i would hope that if if they come to a
scientific
world view they would lead a better more
fulfilled life i would hope that
if they understand about life about
where they come from where they
themselves come from
their ancestors where they come from in
evolution i would hope that they would
feel
more satisfied with living because they
know where they come from they
understand the world in which they live
the process that gave rise to them
that's what i would want to achieve
i i think that somebody who dies without
ever knowing why they were born in the
first place
uh has has died deprived of something
important do you think there is a why or
do we decide that why
there is a you said um if somebody dies
without knowing
why by why i simply meant the causal
chain that led to their existence
i didn't i didn't mean a purpose yeah
yeah do you if somebody were to ask you
what's the meaning of life
what would you say well i would say on
the one hand the meaning of life is
propagation of your selfish genes
on the other hand i would say you make
your own meaning
and we and we all do that and we again
lead a better life
if we have if we develop something
important i mean if in your case you you
have a media company and that's very
fulfilling
in my case i write books and give
lectures that's very fulfilling
somebody else writes music or plays in
music there's all sorts of ways you can
give meaning
to your life your your personal
relationships your
your love for your spouse and your
children etc these these all give
meaning to life
do you look at that any differently like
knowing
the the evolutionary biological reasons
for
love i know that um you've had a long
lasting not really
no i i i i don't think i
i think i just behave like a human being
in that respect
and just go through feel it it's
interesting because the
the reason that i asked my earlier
question is
for me i i have needed to be able to
visualize the process once i could
understand like i'll even just put it in
evolutionary terms once i understood
evolutionarily what was going on
why emotions were arising the way that
they were arising why my brain was
developed in sort of this
tri-layered thing that there's you know
basically your
lizard brain your mammalian brain your
neocortex once i could
understand all of that i could go oh i
see like this fear response that i'm
having
i don't need to just act in accordance
with it i can actually use my prefrontal
cortex to interrupt
the signal i can use what i call
physiological hooks so breathing from
your diaphragm which i'd actually love
to know if you know why that works so
well
but breathing from your diaphragm when
you're meditating
instantly begins to shift you out of
fight or flight
and into the parasympathetic and so
as i began to think of myself as a
biological system
that the doors of the universe opened to
me and so i'm
always i one of the weirdest episodes i
ever did of conversations with tom the
show that we're doing right now
i got into this like two ships passing
in the night the other person that i was
talking to
was just convinced there was there was
like a mystical thing
and i was just like dude we're we're
biological material
um you know phineas gage i'm sure and so
phineas gage railroad spike through his
head never the same after it i'm like
the notion that there's some part of me
that survives beyond my soul or that is
in any way
different than the sum total of my
biology is crazy
and so once i understood oh i'm a
biological machine but
i have even if sam harris is right and
that my free will is a total delusion
i feel like a writer on an elephant
exactly yeah yeah
no i i agree with that and of course the
phineas gage type
evidence means there's no question about
it we are nothing but our brains
but but nevertheless when you're in love
it it doesn't diminish from it that you
that you that you
you know it's just brain stuff and
hormones
that is going on it's still an an
intense emotion
yeah i think that that is
arguably the most important thing that
somebody could derive from your work is
you go into the biology you talk about
the evolution
you um you look
plainly at whether religion is likely to
be true or not
but i feel like you hand people an
entryway to
a universe of of just unimaginable
beauty
yes talk a little bit about the greatest
show on earth
uh this is my book on the evidence for
evolution um it's a the full quote is
the greatest show on earth the only game
in town which is
i think a circus thing
um so it it really is just simply laying
out
why why we know that the darwinian
evolution is true
and uh so it goes through all the all
the evidence
um and uh yes one of the books i'm proud
of
and what is it that is so awe inspiring
in that that you
called it the greatest show
but the product of the only game in town
is the immense diversity of life the
complexity of life the elegance of it
the profoundly convincing illusion of
design
the sheer beauty of it
that is all produced by a very very
simple physical process
and uh so it is the only game in town
and the product is the greatest show on
earth
and as somebody who i'm assuming you
believe when we die it's essentially
like a light switch you're just out and
it's done
um how does that influence how you think
about living
it makes me want to live life to the
full and to encourage other people to do
the same
the only life we've got so let's live it
to the full
and let's leave the world a better place
than we found it
i think that is a perfect place to wrap
up
richard thank you so much for coming on
the show man i i have been blown away by
your work
for years uh and i'm just grateful that
you put it out there
and i know that at times it is maybe a
little tumultuous
uh but i respect you just keep going man
thank you thank you for everything
you've done it was an honor to have you
on the show
all right everybody that's it you should
follow this man you should read all of
his books you can go to
richarddawkins.net you can learn more
about his
um campaign to change the world for the
better there
but uh drop his name into amazon you
will get a laundry list of extraordinary
books i recommend them
all all right everybody peace out thank
you
thank you man
all right how do you know when it's time
to break
up will having kids ruin your dreams why
can't you control that
ugly jealousy when do you know if it's
time to move in
or get the hell out these are just a few
of the no
holds barred no bs conversations we'll
tackle
on the new youtube channel relationship
theory along with my wife
the lovely and talented lisa billy will
bring our
20 years of experience juggling our
entrepreneurial aspirations
while maintaining a strong relationship
through all the obstacles that have
smacked us in the gut walloped us upside
the head
on a daily basis it's just as hard to
maintain a relationship as it is to
build a successful company
maybe even harder but it is well worth
it certainly more worth it than building
a company and
if you can't maintain a healthy
relationship then there's no way you're
going to be able to thrive in your
business environment it's absolutely
impossible
we might be thriving now but it wasn't
always the case for us we had to deal
with family pressure
financial struggles and a never-ending
stream of obstacles
and just when you think one problem has
been solved ten others are going to slam
right into you and let me tell you if
you can't deal with the inevitable
struggles that are coming your way
there's no way that you're going to stay
together like most of our success we've
gotten to where we are by making a lot
of mistakes and learning along the way
and now through relationship theory
we're sharing everything that we've
learned
lisa and i will tell you that if you
want to stay together you better open up
or
shut up we'll also share some secrets on
how to keep the sexual spark alive
and practical tools to help you stop
fighting
for anyone that wants to improve their
relationship or get ready to
have one this show is for you
so if you want to level up on your
relationship game boys and girls
you need to watch and subscribe to
relationship theory at
youtube.com forward slash relationship
theory or
click the link at the top of the episode
description take care
and be legendary we are now hackable
animals
that we have the technology to decipher
what you think
what you want to predict human choices
to manipulate human desires
in ways which were never possible before